---
work: Guards! Guards!
author: Terry Pratchett
passage_id: s05
kind: scene
word_count: 3628
source_chapters:
- 21
notes: scene-aligned chunk; see tools/sample_scenes.py. start_chapter_idx=20.
---

move along there, ladies and gentlemen. Move along, now. Move along. Let’s be having you, please.” He waved his arms in a vague gesture of authority as the people shuffled nervously away. Out of the corner of his eye he saw red flames behind the rooftops, and sparks spiraling in the sky. “Haven’t you got any homes to go to?” he croaked. The Librarian knuckled out into the Library of the here and now. Every hair on his body bristled with rage. He pushed open the door and swung out into the stricken city. Someone out there was about to find that their worst nightmare was a maddened Librarian. With a badge. The dragon swooped leisurely back and forth over the nighttime city, barely flapping its wings. It didn’t need to. The thermals were giving it the lift it needed. There were fires all over Ankh-Morpork. So many bucket chains had formed between the river and various burning buildings that buckets were getting misdirected and hijacked. Not that you really needed a bucket to pick up the turbid waters of the river Ankh—a net was good enough. Downstream, teams of smoke-stained people worked feverishly to close the huge, corroded gates under the Brass Bridge. They were Ankh-Morpork’s last defense against fire, since then the Ankh had no outlet and gradually, oozingly, filled the space between the walls. A man could suffocate under it. The workers on the bridge were the ones who couldn’t or wouldn’t run. Many others were teeming through the gates of the city and heading out across the chilly, mist-wreathed plains. But not for long. The dragon, looping and curving gracefully above the devastation, glided out over the walls. After a few seconds the guards saw actinic fire stab down through the mists. The tide of humanity flowed back, with the dragon hovering over it like a sheepdog. The fires of the stricken city glowed redly off the underside of its wings. “Got any suggestions about what we do next, Sergeant?” said Nobby. Colon didn’t reply. I wish Captain Vimes were here, he thought. He wouldn’t have known what to do either, but he’s got a much better vocabulary to be baffled in. Some of the fires went out as the rising waters and the confused tangle of fire chains did their work. The dragon didn’t appear to be inclined to start anymore. It had made its point. “I wonder who it’ll be,” said Nobby. “What?” said Carrot. “The sacrifice, I mean.” “Sergeant said people wouldn’t put up with it,” said Carrot stoically. “Yeah, well. Look at it this way: if you say to people, what’s it to be, either your house burned down around you or some girl you’ve probably never met being eaten, well, they might get a bit thoughtful. Human nature, see.” “I’m sure a hero will turn up in time,” said Carrot. “With some new sort of weapon, or something. And strike at its voonerable spot.” There was the silence of sudden intense listening. “What’s one of them?” said Nobby. “A spot. Where it’s voonerable. My grandad used to tell me stories. Hit a dragon in its voonerables, he said, and you’ve killed it.” “Like kicking it in the wossnames?” said Nobby, interestedly. “Dunno. I suppose so. Although, Nobby, I’ve told you before it is not right to—” “And where’s the spot, like?” “Oh, a different place on each dragon. You wait till it flies over and then you say, there’s the voonerable spot, and then you kill it,” said Carrot. “Something like that.” Sergeant Colon stared blankly into space. “Hmm,” said Nobby. They watched the panorama of panic for a while. Then Sergeant Colon said, “You sure about the voonerables?” “Yes. Oh, yes.” “I wish you hadn’t been, lad.” They looked at the terrified city again. “You know,” said Nobby, “you always told me you used to win prizes for archery in the army, Sergeant. You said you had a lucky arrow, you always made sure you got your lucky arrow back, you said you—” “All right! All right! But this isn’t the same thing, is it? Anyway, I’m not a hero. Why should I do it?” “Captain Vimes pays us thirty dollars a month,” said Carrot. “Yes,” said Nobby, grinning, and you get five dollars extra responsibility allowance.” “But Captain Vimes has gone,” said Colon wretchedly. Carrot looked at him sternly. “I am sure,” he said, “that if he were here, he’d be the first to—” Colon waved him into silence. “That’s all very well,” he said. “But what if I miss?” “Look on the bright side,” said Nobby. “You’ll probably never know it.” Sergeant Colon’s expression mutated into an evil, desperate grin. “We’ll never know it, you mean,” he said. “What?” “If you think I’m standing on some rooftop on my tod, you can think again. I order you to accompany me. Anyway,” he added, “you get one dollar responsibility allowance, too.” Nobby’s face twisted in panic. “No I don’t!” he croaked. “Captain Vimes said he was docking it for five years for being a disgrace to the species!” “Well, you might just get it back. Anyway, you know all about voonerables. I’ve watched you fight.” Carrot saluted smartly. “Permission to volunteer, sir,” he said. “And I only get twenty dollars a month training pay an I don’t mind at all, sir.” Sergeant Colon cleared his throat. Then he straightened the hang of his breastplate. It was one of those with astonishingly impressive pectoral muscles embossed upon it. His chest and stomach fitted into it in the same way that jelly fits into a mold. What would Captain Vimes do now? Well, he’d have a drink. But if he didn’t have a drink, what would he do? “What we need,” he said slowly, “is a Plan.” That sounded good. That sentence alone sounded worth the pay. If you had a Plan, you were halfway there. And already he thought he could hear the cheering of crowds. They were lining the streets, and they were throwing flowers, and he was being carried triumphantly through the grateful city. The drawback was, he suspected, that he was being carried in an urn. Lupine Wonse padded along the drafty corridors to the Patrician’s bedroom. It had never been a sumptuous apartment at best, and contained little more than a narrow bed and a few battered cupboards. It looked even worse now, with one wall gone. Sleepwalk at night now and you could step right into the vast cavern that was the Great Hall. Even so, he shut the door behind him for a semblance of privacy. Then, cautiously and with many nervous glances at the great space beyond, he knelt down in the center of the floor and pried up a board. A long black robe was dragged into view. Then Wonse reached further down into the dusty space between the floors and rummaged around. He rummaged still further. Then he lay down and stuck both arms into the gap and flailed desperately. A book sailed across the room and hit him in the back of the head. “Looking for this, were you?” said Vimes. He stepped out of the shadows. Wonse was on his knees, his mouth opening and shutting. What’s he going to say, Vimes thought. Is it going to be: I know what this looks like, or will it be: How did you get in here, or maybe it’ll be: Listen, I can explain everything. I wish I had a loaded dragon in my hands right now. Wonse said, “Okay. Clever of you to guess.” Of course, that was always an outside chance, Vimes added. “Under the floorboards,” he said aloud. “First place anyone’d look. Rather foolish, that was.” “I know. I suppose he didn’t think anyone would be searching,” said Wonse, standing up and brushing the dust off himself. “I’m sorry?” said Vimes pleasantly. “Vetinari. You know how he was for scheming and things. He was involved in most of the plots against himself, that was how he ran things. He enjoyed it. Obviously he called it up and couldn’t control it. Something even more cunning than he was.” “So what were you doing?” said Vimes. “I wondered if it might be possible to reverse the spell. Or maybe call up another dragon. They’d fight then.” “A sort of balance of terror, you mean?” said Vimes. “Could be worth a try,” said Wonse earnestly. He took a few steps closer. “Look, about your job, I know we were both a bit overwrought at the time, so of course if you want it back there’ll be no prob—” “It must have been terrible,” said Vimes. “Imagine what must have gone through his mind. He called it up, and then found it wasn’t just some sort of tool but a real thing with a mind of its own. A mind just like his, but with all the brakes off. You know, I wouldn’t mind betting that at the start he really thought that what he was doing was all for the best. He must have been insane. Sooner or later, anyway.” “Yes,” said Wonse hoarsely. “It must have been terrible.” “Ye gods, but I’d like to get my hands on him! All those years I’ve known the man, and I’d never realized…” Wonse said nothing. “Run,” said Vimes softly. “What?” “Run. I want to see you run.” “I don’t underst—” “I saw someone run away, the night the dragon flamed that house. I remember thinking at the time that he moved in a funny way, sort of bounding along. And then the other day I saw you running away from the dragon. Could almost have been the same man, I thought. Skipping, almost. Like someone running to keep up. Any of them get out, Wonse?” Wonse waved a hand in what he might have thought was a nonchalant way. “That’s just ridiculous, that’s not proof,” he said. “I noticed you sleep in here now,” said Vimes. “I suppose the king likes to have you handy, does he?” “You’ve got no proof at all,” whispered Wonse. “Of course, I haven’t. The way someone runs. The eager tone of voice. That’s all. But that doesn’t matter, does it? Because it wouldn’t matter even if I did have proof,” said Vimes. “There’s no one to take it to. And you can’t give me my job back.” “I can!” said Wonse. “I can, and you needn’t just be captain—” “You can’t give me my job back,” repeated Vimes. “It was never yours to take away. I was never an officer of the city, or an officer of the king, or an officer of the Patrician. I was an officer of the law. It might have been corrupted and bent, but it was law, of a sort. There isn’t any law now except: ‘you’ll get burned alive if you don’t watch out.’ Where’s the place in there for me?” Wonse darted forward and grabbed him by the arm. “But you can help me!” he said. “There may be a way to destroy the dragon, d’you see, or at least we can help people, channel things to mitigate the worst of it, somehow find a meeting point—” Vimes’s blow caught Wonse on the cheek and spun him around. “The dragon’s here,” he snapped. “You can’t channel it or persuade it or negotiate with it. There’s no truce with dragons. You brought it here and we’re stuck with it, you bastard.” Wonse lowered his hand from the bright white mark where the punch had connected. “What are you going to do?” he said. Vimes didn’t know. He’d thought of a dozen ways that the thing could go, but the only one that was really suitable was killing Wonse. And, face to face, he couldn’t do it. “That’s the trouble with people like you,” said Wonse, getting up. “You’re always against anything attempted for the betterment of mankind, but you never have any proper plans of your own. Guards! Guards!” He grinned maniacally at Vimes. “Didn’t expect that, did you?” he said. “We’ve still got guards here, you know. Not so many, of course. Not many people want to come in.” There were footsteps in the passage outside and four of the palace guards padded in, swords drawn. “I wouldn’t put up a fight, if I were you,” Wonse went on. “They’re desperate and uneasy men. But very highly paid.” Vimes said nothing. Wonse was a gloater. You always stood a chance with gloaters. The old Patrician had never been a gloater, you could say that for him. If he wanted you dead, you never even heard about it. The thing to do with gloaters was play the game according to the rules. “You’ll never get away with it,” he said. “You’re right. You’re absolutely right. But never is a long time,” said Wonse. “None of us get away with anything for that long.” “You shall have some time to reflect on this,” he said and nodded to the guards. “Throw him in the special dungeon. And then go about that other little task.” “Er,” said the leader of the guards, and hesitated. “What’s the matter, man?” “You, er, want us to attack him?” said the guard miserably. Thick though the palace guard were, they were as aware as everyone else of the conventions, and when guards are summoned to deal with one man in overheated circumstances it’s not a good time for them. The bugger’s bound to be heroic, he was thinking. This guard was not looking forward to a future in which he was dead. “Of course, you idiot!” “But, er, there’s only one of him,” said the guard captain. “And he’s smilin’,” said a man behind him. “Prob’ly goin’ to swing on the chandeliers any minute,” said one of his colleagues. “And kick over the table, and that.” “He’s not even armed!” shrieked Wonse. “Worst kind, that,” said one of the guards, with deep stoicism. “They leap up, see, and grab one of the ornamental swords behind the shield over the fireplace.” “Yeah,” said another, suspiciously. “And then they chucks a chair at you.” “There’s no fireplace! There’s no sword! There’s only him! Now take him!” screamed Wonse. A couple of guards grabbed Vimes tentatively by the shoulders. “You’re not going to do anything heroic, are you?” whispered one of them. “Wouldn’t know where to start,” he said. “Oh. Right.” As Vimes was hauled away he heard Wonse breaking into insane laughter. They always did, your gloaters. But he was correct about one thing. Vimes didn’t have a plan. He hadn’t thought much about what was going to happen next. He’d been a fool, he told himself, to think that you just had a confrontation and that was the end of it. He also wondered what the other task was. The palace guards said nothing, but stared straight ahead and marched him down, across the ruined hall, and through the wreckage of another corridor to an ominous door. They opened it, threw him in, and marched away. And no one, absolutely no one, noticed the thin, leaf-like thing that floated gently down from the shadows of the roof, tumbling over and over in the air like a sycamore seed, before landing in the tangled gewgaws of the hoard. It was a peanut shell. It was the silence that awoke Lady Ramkin. Her bedroom looked out over the dragon pens, and she was used to sleeping to the susurration of rustling scales, the occasional roar of a dragon flaming in its sleep, and the keening of the gravid females. Absence of any sound at all was like an alarm clock. She had cried a bit before going to sleep, but not much, because it was no use being soppy and letting the side down. She lit the lamp, pulled on her rubber boots, grabbed the stick which might be all that stood between her and theoretical loss of virtue, and hurried down through the shadowy house. As she crossed the damp lawn to the kennels she was vaguely aware that something was happening down in the city, but dismissed it as not currently worth thinking about. Dragons were more important. She pushed open the door. Well, they were still there. The familiar stink of swamp dragons, half pond mud and half chemical explosion, gusted out into the night. Each dragon was balancing on its hind legs in the center of its pen, neck arched, staring with ferocious intensity at the roof. “Oh,” she said. “Flying around up there again, is it? Showing off. Don’t you worry about it, children. Mummy’s here.” She put the lamp on a high shelf and stamped along to Errol’s pen. “Well now, my lad,” she began, and stopped. Errol was stretched out on his side. A thin plume of gray smoke was drifting from his mouth, and his stomach expanded and contracted like a bellows. And his skin from the neck down was an almost pure white. “I think if I ever rewrite Diseases you’ll get a whole chapter all to yourself,” she said quietly, and unbolted the gate of the pen. “Let’s see if that nasty temperature has gone down, shall we?” She reached out to stroke his skin and gasped. She pulled the hand back hurriedly and watched the blisters form on her fingertips. Errol was so cold he burned. As she stared at him the small around marks that her warmth had melted filmed over with frozen air. Lady Ramkin sat back on her haunches. “Just what kind of dragon are you—?” she began. There was the distant sound of a knock at the front door of the house. She hesitated for a moment, then blew out the lamp, crept heavily along the length of the kennels and pulled aside the scrap of sacking over the window. The first light of dawn showed her the silhouette of a guardsman on her doorstep, the plumes of his helmet blowing in the breeze. She bit her lip in panic, scuttled back to the door, fled across the lawn and dived into the house, taking the stairs three at a time. “Stupid, stupid,” she muttered, realizing the lamp was back downstairs. But no time for that. By the time she went and got it, Vimes might have gone away. Working by feel and memory in the gloom she found her best wig and rammed it on her head. Somewhere among the ointments and dragon remedies on her dressing table was something called, as far as she could remember, Dew of the Night or some such unsuitable name, a present long ago from a thoughtless nephew. She tried several bottles before she found something that, by the smell of it, was probably the one. Even to a nose which had long ago shut down most of its sensory apparatus in the face of the overpoweringness of dragons, it seemed, well, more potent than she remembered. But apparently men liked that kind of thing. Or so she had read. Damn nonsense, really. She twitched the top hem of her suddenly far too sensible nightshirt into a position which, she hoped, revealed without actually exposing, and hurried back down the stairs. She stopped in front of the door, took a deep breath, twisted the handle and realized even as she pulled the door open that she should have taken the rubber boots off— “Why, Captain,” she said winsomely, “this is a who the hell are you?” The head of the palace guard took several steps backward and, because he was of peasant stock, made a few surreptitious signs to ward off evil spirits. They clearly didn’t work. When he opened his eyes again the thing was still there, still bristling with rage, still reeking of something sickly and fermented, still crowned with a skewed mass of curls, still looming behind a quivering bosom that made the roof of his mouth go dry— He’d heard about these sort of things. Harpies, they were called. What had it done with Lady Ramkin? The sight of the rubber boots had him confused, though. Legends about harpies were short on references to rubber boots. “Out with it, fellow,” Lady Ramkin boomed, hitching up her nightie to a more respectable neckline. “Don’t just stand there opening and shutting your mouth. What d’you want?” “Lady Sybil Ramkin?” said the guard, not in the polite way of someone seeking mere confirmation but in the incredulous tones of someone who found it very hard to believe the answer could be “yes.” “Use your eyes, young man. Who d’you think I am?” The guard pulled himself together. “Only I’ve got a summons for Lady Sybil Ramkin,” he said uncertainly. Her voice was withering. “What do you mean, a summons?” “To attend upon the palace, you see.” “I can’t imagine why that is necessary at this time in the morning,” she said, and made to slam the door. It wouldn’t shut, though, because of the sword point jammed into it at the last moment. “If you don’t come,” said the guard, “I have been ordered to take steps.” The door shot back and her face pressed against his, almost knocking him unconscious with the scent of rotting rose petals. “If you think you’ll lay a hand on me—” she began. The guard’s glance darted sideways, just for a moment, to the dragon kennels. Sybil Ramkin’s face went pale. “You wouldn’t!” she hissed. He swallowed. Fearsome though she was, she was only human. She could only bite your head off metaphorically. There were, he told himself, far worse things than Lady Ramkin although, admittedly, they weren’t three inches from his nose at this point in time. “Take steps,” he repeated, in a croak. She straightened
