---
work: The Way of Kings
author: Brandon Sanderson
passage_id: s03
kind: scene
word_count: 3510
source_chapters:
- 46
notes: scene-aligned chunk; see tools/sample_scenes.py. start_chapter_idx=45.
---

stars that shone in the night sky. The Dwelling was said to be at the very center of that collection of stars, where the points of light were so thick that one couldn’t distinguish space between them. That place of light and peace was where the souls of good men would find rest. There were other places too. One, Khothar, was a place of fire and smoke. Khothar was the land of the Stormshades—and the Elinrah taught that this was a land where the souls of men who did not follow the Almighty were punished. There was a place even worse, however. The Deep. A place reserved for men who professed allegiance to the Almighty, but who were evil in their hearts. This was a place of special suffering, a land of dark coldness. A land of madness. Merin hadn’t expected to find himself there. But where else could he be than the Deep? What had he done that he would lie bound, his screams lapped up by the highstorm’s roar, his face beaten by both rains and the crashing waves from the river below? The wind of the tempest pushed from behind, but it was doubled by passing air to the sides, a wind created as their boat moved at a ridiculous speed over the waters. Cities, dark from the clouds overhead, blipped past like drops of forgotten rain. If men in them watched the river, they might have seen fools caught in a perpetual roar of destruction. They might have heard screams of terror over the wind. But they probably didn’t. Fortunately, unconsciousness took Merin before madness could. The feeling of wet soreness that awakened him was worse, even, than the pain he had felt on his second day in the army. Merin felt as if a tenset of spearmen had taken their practice weapons and beaten him repeatedly. He groaned, water dripping from his mouth. He would have vomited, but he had freed his stomach of its contents before the first few minutes of travel had passed. THE WAY OF KINGS PRI M E 409 “Ah, first time’s the worst, you know!” Selsen’s voice quipped from a short distance away. Merin opened sodden eyes, lifting his face from the wooden plank. His bonds had been loosed, but he could barely move anyway. “Hand me my sword,” he mumbled. “I’m going to kill you.” Selsen laughed. Merin groggily located the man standing on the deck a short distance away, fiddling with some ropes near the sails. “Thought we’d overshoot there for a moment! Almost couldn’t get these knots undone. That’s the really tricky part. Anyone can start, but stopping . . . well, that takes a smooth hand. Have to find an open place, where the stormflood weakens, then cut the sails and ride it out. But we made it. My men should have seen us pass—they’ll be here soon.” Merin managed to sit. His head hurt worst of all, and he blinked in the waning light. It was dusk, and they seemed to be floating on a random section of the river, no buildings in sight. “Where are we?” he asked. “Near Jeznarn,” the man said. “About fifty miles north of Crossguard.” Merin froze, pain forgotten for a moment. “Fifty miles north of . . . but, that trip could take weeks on foot! How long were we . . . ?” “Usually takes about five hours,” Selsen said happily. Halfway across the kingdom in five hours. Merin had marched that same distance in the army, and had taken more than three weeks. Selsen noticed his wonder. He waddled over, then stooped down, grinning. “This is it, you see, young lord? The future! No more waiting for messengers on horses, no! We have a new way of traveling. New, bright, and wondrous!” “New, bright, and insane,” Merin mumbled, rubbing his bruised right arm. “Besides, what if you want to send a message south instead of east or west? Or, what if you want it delivered during the summer, when days pass without storms? In fact, what if you don’t happen to live near a lait at all!” Selsen rubbed his chin. “I’m working on a way to do it without the river,” he said. “Though I haven’t quite decided how to do it without the storm. That part’s kind of central to the strategy, eh?” Merin lurched to his feet, stumbling over to where Renarin still lay, wet and unconscious. “You’re crazier than a rock with no name,” Merin said, patting Renarin’s cheek and trying to wake him up. “Ha! You don’t know how lucky you are! Why, poor Aredor, he had to come on the big ship!” “The big ship?” Merin asked, turning. “Sure,” Selsen said. “This gal, the Calmness, is the design ship. I built it 410 BR AND O N SAN DE RS ON first as a kind of model, then built the larger version that Aredor rode. He had so many men with him that we couldn’t fit them all on the little ship! Safer, true, but not half as exciting!” Merin closed his eyes. Ignore him. Ignore him. You’re alive, and you’re near Crossguard. He turned back to Renarin, who was beginning to stir. Renarin opened his eyes, groaning. “So this is what they do to boys who disobey their fathers,” he mumbled as Merin helped him up. He paused, freezing, then reached for his pocket with an urgent motion. He pulled free the onyx sphere with a sigh of relief. “Ah, there they are!” Selsen said, pointing toward a group of riders descending the lait slope. “They’re good men. Much obliged, like I am, to Lord Aredor’s generosity. We’ll give you a pair of horses to replace the ones you left at the Perch, and you can be on your way. You could be to Crossguard in a few days, if you ride hard.” Merin sighed at the thought of more traveling. He looked at Renarin, who didn’t look much better. But Renarin was right. Aredor did come by river. A clever guess, given what Aredor had said back in Kholinar, or . . . something else? “Let’s go,” Renarin said. “We need to find him as quickly as possible.” chapter 45 JASNAH 10 A t first, Jasnah thought that the spark of sunlight was a trick of the caves. During their week-long passage through darkness she had occasionally seen promising glints of light up ahead, only to discover a shard of quartz jutting from the cavern wall, its crystalline surface deceptively reflecting their lanternlight. She had almost begun to think the caverns eternal, that she had led the frightened palace servants from a quick slaughter to a slow, creeping death by starvation. The mountain was an oppressive tyrant around them, its endless passages misleading, almost maddening. Surely men were not meant to delve its secrets. This place with its dripping waters, its twisted rock formations, and its darkened corners should be death to those who arrogantly thought to navigate its paths. One thing, however, kept the servants from bending beneath the weight of uncertainty and gloom. Taln always seemed to know where he was going. When they reached a merging of caverns or tunnels, he instantly picked a direction, prodding them on with his sheer force of decisiveness. Men did not grumble when Taln led, and women did not question. Jasnah was amazed at how easily they followed, how quick they were to smile and forget their pains when the daily march was through. Theirs should have been a desolate company—their kin slaughtered, their home ransacked, their lives in question. Instead of despair, however, she saw in them a 412 BR AN D O N SAN DE RS ON stalwart determination. And, with resignation, she could only determine one source for their resilience. They believed him. Taln guided them firmly. He cared for their wounded, showing a surprising level of medical proficiency. He spoke to them with confidence, ignoring Meridas’s frequent suggestions that the troop was headed to its doom. Taln spoke of Heralds and Stormshades, of the Return and the need to defend mankind. Jasnah cringed at every such profession, his mental problems forcing her to acknowledge that despite his competence, he was not a man who could be trusted with extended leadership. Many of the servants, however, didn’t share her apprehension. She could blame them little—considering their sufferings, any hint of hope was of value. She became certain, however, that when . . . if . . . they escaped the caves, she would need to adopt a firmer stand with Taln, lest he infect the others with his delusions. Meridas presented his own problem. Her refusal to recognize their wedding had angered him, and though he was civil, she could see his frustration. Though he was by far the ranking nobleman in the group, he had been wrong about the passages, and couldn’t very well demand leader­ ship when he didn’t know the way. His barbs against Taln were plentiful and snide, but he didn’t attempt to give flagrant commands—he was clever enough to understand that the madman was their only chance to escape. Indeed, Meridas found himself isolated by necessity. There were few nobles in the group, and besides Jasnah and Kemnar, none were very high in rank. Kemnar’s guards were all nineteenth or twentieth Lords—professional guards, well beneath Meridas’s consideration. Jasnah’s ladies-in-waiting were little better. That only left two sixteenth lords, palace couriers who had been absorbed into the group during the escape. Meridas quickly appropri- ated these two to be his adjuncts, but they were hardly fitting confidants. Despite Meridas’s cool demeanor, Jasnah could see that the situation grated upon him. He didn’t like feeling subordinate, and he shot occasional hateful looks at Taln. Once the group reached safety, Meridas would also have to be controlled, lest he act on his frustration and try to kill Taln. So, when the sunlight ahead was finally confirmed, Jasnah knew she had to act quickly. She pulled herself up, trying not to think about her bruised feet and aching muscles. Even as the citizens piled from the cave opening, exulting in the open sky and waning evening light, Jasnah approached Meridas and Taln, who stood at the back of the crowd. The two men were eyeing each other with hostility—their reasons for truce had just expired. THE WAY OF KINGS PRI M E 413 “No,” Jasnah commanded. The men glanced at her, but kept wary watch on each other. Meridas’s hand was at his side, white smoke curling as his Blade was summoned. “Stay out of this, Jasnah,” Taln said. “I will try not to kill him.” Meridas smiled at that. “Why do you need that sword so badly, Taln?” Jasnah asked. “Aren’t you worried that he’ll kill you? Who will fulfill your quest if that happens?” Taln shook his head, dismissing Jasnah’s argument. “The odds now are not as they were at the feast. I need that sword. I’ll have to risk death for the good of the very quest you mention.” Jasnah ground her teeth as Meridas raised his Blade. “You need the weapon to determine where your brothers are, correct? It will point you in their direction?” “Yes,” Taln said. “So you only need to hold it for a moment, right?” Taln paused. “Yes,” he admitted. Jasnah turned to Meridas. “What?” the nobleman asked with amusement. “You expect me to give my weapon over to the madman?” “Only for a few heartbeats,” Jasnah said. “That’s long enough to kill a man,” Meridas said. Jasnah rolled her eyes. “I’ll take both Blades, then stick his in the ground near the cave entrance. Then I’ll give yours to him. If it looks like he’s going to try and attack, you can run over and take the one from the ground. We’ll let him hold it for a count of a hundred, then he has to give it back.” Meridas smiled. “Ah, my dear Lady Jasnah, you forget. I am a simple merchant by heart. What have I to gain from such a bargain? Why would I let him hold my Blade, if only for a moment? There is nothing in it for me.” “You are wrong,” Jasnah countered. “There is something in it for you.” Meridas raised his eyebrows. Jasnah gritted her teeth. She had considered this bargain during the length of their trip in darkness. Meridas was a shrewd business man, if nothing else. She had only one gem to offer—and even it would be a gamble. I’m sorry Nelshenden, she thought silently. “There is something you want, Meridas,” Jasnah said. “Me. We are not married yet. If you ever intend to see that ceremony completed, then you should be wary of offence. I will not look favorably upon a suitor who ignores my will in this matter.” 414 BR AND O N SAN DE RS ON Meridas snorted. “Suitor? Your brother has already given you to me, my dear. The betrothal, at least, is still official.” “It was official as long as Elhokar had me locked in his palace,” Jasnah replied. “He no longer has that palace, and the only guards I see here are my own. I could be persuaded to see my brother’s will in this matter, if it were for the good of Alethkar. But, make no mistake, I will not again put myself in a position where I will be forced to wed. If you wish my hand, then you will need to convince me that such a union should occur.” Meridas paused, frowning slightly. Taln was still tense, newly-captured Shardblade gripped before him. Both, however, were considering her proposal. Jasnah sighed at the necessities of sating masculine pride—one would think that a god and a Parshen would be a little less childish. Unfortunately, she wasn’t finished yet—it would do her no good to solve this argument if she just had to quell another one on the morrow. “There is one more thing, my lords,” Jasnah said forcibly, drawing their attention back to her. “Lords?” Meridas asked, emphasizing the plural. “He holds a Blade now, Meridas,” Jasnah said. “Taken from a Shardbearer in battle.” “Taken falsely,” Meridas spat. “He took it in the defense of Alethkar’s people,” Jasnah said. “Something you did not seem very concerned about doing. We will see which man retains his Blade once I tell my brother how you walked away, leaving me to fend for myself in a palace filled with enemy soldiers.” Meridas’s frown deepened. Jasnah sighed. “My lords, the First City has fallen, and our king’s back is exposed to an enemy he doesn’t know exists. There is no time for squab- bling—we need to act decisively. This troop, wearied though it is, must bring word to my brother. We can’t afford to be divided—we need one leader, not three. That leader will be me.” “Excuse me?” Meridas asked. Taln didn’t respond, though his eyes narrowed slightly. “You will be in command of the group, Meridas, as befits your rank,” Jasnah said. “But I will decide where we go and what we do. It is vital that we get word to my brother, and that we do so without revealing ourselves. Taln, you get to hold Meridas’s Blade for a hundred heartbeats. Meridas, you get my hand in betrothal. In exchange, you will both do as I say until such time as my kingdom has been rescued from its invaders.” THE WAY OF KINGS PRI M E 415 “You promise to accept the marriage?” Meridas asked carefully, speaking with the tongue of a merchant. “By your oath?” Jasnah’s stomach twisted. “Yes.” “I cannot give myself over to your command,” Taln said. “I need to seek my brethren.” “What will be faster?” Jasnah asked. “Seeking them on your own, without having touched your Blade, or seeking them with both your Blade and the messengers of a grateful king to serve you? Protect me now, during our time of need, and I will see that you have the resources of Alethkar at your disposal.” She was making many promises—difficult promises. It was only after she was done, Taln and Meridas considering their separate rewards, that she realized she was doing it again. Protecting Elhokar. It had proven her folly once before, and because of her oversight, Nelshenden and Shinri were dead. No, she told herself forcefully. This is for Alethkar, not my brother. I will not see the kingdom of my fathers fall to invasion. “Very well,” Meridas suddenly declared, stabbing his Blade point first into the stone ground. In the distance, the peasants were resting from their journey, Brother Lhan distributing the evening rations, Kemnar’s soldiers at his side. Kemnar himself had edged closer to Jasnah’s conference, eyes glittering with curiosity. He stood, Jasnah noted, within distance of striking at Meridas, should the man prove dangerous. “I will give you a hundred days,” Taln finally decided. “If we have no success by that time, then I must seek my brethren alone.” It was the best she was going to get. “Very well,” Jasnah said. “Swear to obey my will, swear it by the Tenth Name.” “Kevahin,” Meridas whispered. “Kevahin,” Taln said. Jasnah nodded, and Meridas turned, leaving his Blade in the stone. “One hundred heartbeats,” he said. “You need not take his own Blade away. I . . . trust him.” His eyes said he believed nothing of the sort, yet he walked away anyway, back turned to Taln—as if daring the madman to strike against him. Taln ignored the retreating noblemen. The false Herald rammed his Blade in the ground, then grabbed Meridas’s abandoned weapon with a reverent touch. She heard him whisper something under his breath—a single word that sounded like a name. Then he grew apprehensive, almost uncertain. 416 BR AN D O N SAN DE RS ON His grip stiffened with determination, and he raised the Blade in two hands. There was a pause. Finally, he exhaled in relief. “It works,” he said. “The Blade’s powers remain, even if mine do not.” He raised the point of the Blade, turning it to the northwest. “There. That direction.” Jasnah frowned. “Taln, there’s nothing but wilderness to the west.” Taln glanced up, judging the position of the stars as they began to appear. “Riemak,” he said. “The Kingdom of Riemak fell hundreds of years ago,” Jasnah said. “That land is nothing more than a back country of despots and isolated villages. You know that.” You came from Riemak. She left the last part off. “That is where they are nonetheless,” Taln said. “Jorevan. They must have gathered there.” Jasnah frowned. Jorevan, the Holy City, had once been the center of Vorin power. “It was sacked soon after Riemak fell. A local tyrant now controls the Oathgate.” “Why would my brethren gather there?” Taln asked, as if her comments were made in line with his own strange reasonings. “And send me no word? What do they know that I do not? Could they have foreseen that Ral Eram was doomed? Balear’Elin is an Onyxseer. If his powers still work, then perhaps . . .” Taln looked over at her, then jammed the sword back into the ground. “We must go there, to Jorevan. We must know what they know.” “Taln, I . . .” He held up a hand. “I know. You do not believe me. We must go there nonetheless—besides, where else would we go?” “That, we must decide,” Jasnah said. “Go and get your monk friend. I will return Meridas’s Blade to him.” “If Taln speaks correctly, then we are here,” Kemnar said, placing a small rock on the map he had scratched into the stone ground. Firelight illuminated the white scrapings. Across the short plateau, Jasnah’s people had been arranged into a tenset different camps, each with their own fire. Their wood—taken from water barrels and boxes of food—would not last long, but they deserved a warm meal following the extended trek through darkness. They would worry about supplies later. Around the fire with Jasnah sat Taln, Lhan, Meridas, Kemnar, and—at Taln’s suggestion—a broad-figured palace maid named Denia. Jasnah vaguely knew the woman for her gossipy ways and reputed firmness with THE WAY OF KINGS PRI M E 417 her undermaids. During their journey, Denia had somehow become the unofficial leader of the citizens. Jasnah studied the map. The Mount of Ancestors was represented by a massive circle drawn at the bottom. A rock on its eastern side represented Ral Eram. Taln placed their group directly on the other side of the moun- tain, on its western side. She found it amazing that they had traveled so far, bypassing the entire mountain. If it were known that such a direct path lay beneath Ral Eram . . . A short distance to their west lay the border between Alethkar and the Riemak wilds. The demarcation ran directly to the north. Crossguard, Jezenrosh’s palace and the probable location of Elhokar’s army, lay on the far eastern side of the country. It
