---
work: The Way of Kings
author: Brandon Sanderson
passage_id: s04
kind: scene
word_count: 3510
source_chapters:
- 58
notes: scene-aligned chunk; see tools/sample_scenes.py. start_chapter_idx=57.
---

fed already, my lady.” “I’m sure they have,” Shinri said. “Though I doubt the meal was of enviable quality. I think they would appreciate something a little more healthy.” The soldier frowned. “It isn’t good to keep prisoners too healthy, my lady,” he said. “It encourages escape.” “It isn’t good for them to be sickly either,” Shinri replied. “My husband may have need of these men—and I intend to see that they are kept alive 514 BR AN D O N SAN DE RS ON in case that need arises. Cruelty may be your prerogative, solider, but mercy is mine—a right granted me by the Almighty.” The man’s face grew troubled as he considered. If he were too low a rank, he would take the matter to his superior. Shinri was counting on his noble upbringing and the independence it usually inspired. “I brought some for you too,” Shinri noted, pulling back the napkin to reveal the bread rolls underneath. “It’s only bread, soldier. I doubt you’ll find that it makes your prisoners too healthy to be manageable.” “I’ll have to check the basket first,” the soldier finally said. “Very well,” Shinri replied, handing it to him. You’re a little more clever than I had hoped, aren’t you? That’s a pity. He opened the basket, then systematically began breaking each roll in half to check for contraband—as if a high lady would actually have bothered to cook them herself. Shinri sighed inwardly, folding her arms and waiting upon the man’s inspection. “How have they been so far?” she asked as he worked. “I trust you haven’t been keeping them too unhealthy.” The soldier shrugged, ripping apart a roll. “The one on the left stays pretty quiet—he’s a little one, and I doubt he could be of much trouble if he wanted to. The one on the right . . . well, he’s obviously a soldier. Tall lad and well-muscled. Could have been trouble, but I think the captivity took the heart out of him. He screamed and yelled a lot at first, but then got really quiet.” Shinri frowned. “He’s still alive, I assume.” The soldier snorted. “He eats his food, my lady. That means he’s alive enough, but I don’t know if he’s still got his mind or not. I’ve guarded men like him before—men who couldn’t deal with being kept locked up. They usually quiet up after a while, if only because they get tired of yelling.” What a delightfully kind-hearted one you are, Shinri thought sourly as the man selected a few rolls for himself, then handed the basket back to her. I guess that’s how you ended up a jailer. Shinri nodded her satisfaction, then brushed past the man into the hallway. He stayed behind, thankfully, settling into his chair to work on the rolls. Technically, Shinri was a First Lady—his queen. Even if he had denied her entrance, he should never have treated her with the disrespect he had displayed. Ahven’s touch, virulent and destructive as a winter mold, was spreading already. Shinri selected the leftmost hallway. The hallways were relatively well-lit and kept clean, unlike some dungeons Shinri had heard of, but there was a definite smell of unwashed bodies to the place. The cells were all open but THE WAY OF KINGS PRI M E 515 one, and it bore a stout wooden door. A small window at the top provided a glimpse inside, though it was high enough up that Shinri would have trouble looking in without getting up on her toes. She approached the door with trepidation. “Renarin?” she asked in a quiet voice, glancing back toward the guard. There was a pause. “Oh, hello, Shinri,” Renarin’s familiar voice eventually said back. “How are you?” Shinri started slightly. “Um, I’m fine,” she lied, frowning. Even locked in a cell, kept half-starved, you’re a strange one, Renarin. “My family is allied with King Ahven. I talked the guard into letting me bring you some food.” “That was kind of you,” Renarin said. His tone sounded . . . distracted. But, well, that was kind of how he always was. “So, you’re the one who opened the Oathgate? I wasn’t expecting it to be you, but I probably should have been able to figure it out. I’m far too new at this.” Shinri nearly dropped the basket in shock. “How did you know that?” she hissed. There was no answer. “Renarin!” Shinri said a little bit louder. “We need to escape,” Renarin finally said, ignoring her question. “That’s why I’m here,” Shinri said, bending down and sliding back the feeding plate at the base of the door. “Here, take these rolls so the guard doesn’t get suspicious. I was thinking that we should—” “Oh, don’t tell me,” Renarin said, “tell Merin.” Renarin’s face appeared in the opening. He didn’t look too haggard, though he hadn’t shaved in a while. His beard was dark, and a bit patchy, making him look even younger than he was. Behind him, Shinri could make out something on the floor. Something that looked like . . . scribbles of some sort. Renarin accepted the bread. “Merin is on the other side,” he said. “He can work with you on getting us out. I’m too busy right now. Thank you for the bread.” With that, he slid the plate closed with a motion that felt oddly like he were locking her out of his private study. Shinri knelt, stupefied, for a moment. I will never understand that boy, she thought with frustration, rising. She walked back down the hallway, shooting a glance at the guard, then turned down the second parallel corridor. Merin’s cell was directly opposite Renarin’s, and here Shinri paused, basket held before her, staring at the blank door. 516 BR AN D O N SAN DE RS ON She had avoided thinking much about Tethren. Everything else—her marriage, the invasion, Ahven—was just too recent. Her soul already bore a tenset fresh wounds; there was no need to prod at one that had begun to scab over. She didn’t completely believe that Tethren was dead, but she knew that she probably wouldn’t ever be completely satisfied, for she had seen no body. She had made what peace she could during those months spent searching out what had happened to him. Her grief for Tethren was a distant thing, dulled by time and distance. In a way, her guilt over not feeling worse was even more painful than her sense of loss. Yet for reasons she knew were irrational, the boy inside the cell before her was a focus for both emotions. She needed him if she were going to escape—even from a distance, she had heard rumored praises of Merin’s natural fighting ability. The court’s men had been intimidated by this boy who had saved the king’s life twice, a boy who already—after just a few months’ time—knew how to duel well enough to stand against noblemen who had been training all their lives. Yes, she needed this boy—Renarin alone would not be enough to get her past the guards and to the Oathgates. Unfortunately, Shinri knew that if she was going to work with Merin Kholin, she would need to know the truth about Tethren. Bad news is not a thing to be avoided, Lady Jasnah had always said. Better to learn things that bring you pain than to remain in the greater agony of ignorance. Shinri stepped up to the cell door’s window, going up on her toes and peeking in. The cell was sparse and small. Merin looked little better than Renarin did, though he appeared far more a man with his soldier’s build and even beard. He sat at the back of the room, legs folded, hand held before him with one finger pointing toward the ceiling. He was staring intently at the finger, as if in some sort of trance. Wonderful, Shinri thought, anticipating another conversation like the one with Renarin. The guard was right. His mind’s gone. “Merin?” she asked. “Merin Kholin?” The boy looked up, lowering his hand slightly and focusing on the win- dow. He sat for a moment, then leapt to his feet with excitement. “I know you!” he said, rushing to the window. “Lady Jasnah’s ward!” Shinri paused, slightly taken aback. “Shinri Davar,” she said, lowering herself from her toes and speaking through the door. “Am I to be released?” Merin asked with excitement. “Has King Elhokar retaken the palace?” “Hush!” Shinri said, glancing toward the guard, who didn’t appear to THE WAY OF KINGS PRI M E 517 have noticed Merin’s exclamation. “The palace is under Veden control. I am suffered because I am a . . . relation of their king. They think I’m only bringing you some bread.” “Oh.” Merin’s voice sounded disappointed. “Renarin and I need to escape,” he said after a few moments. “Can you help us?” “Perhaps,” Shinri said. “I might be able to discover a time when the Oathgates will be open for us. But they are guarded by five men.” “Us?” Merin asked. “I’m going with you,” Shinri said. “It’s complicated, but I cannot stay in Ral Eram any longer.” Merin was quiet for a moment. “I’ll need my Blade,” he finally said. “You need to get me a Shardblade.” You say that as if finding one were as easy as sneaking extra dessert from the palace kitchens. “That may not be possible,” Shinri said. “Let me think about it.” Today I just wanted to make sure you were both fit and sane—or, in Renarin’s case, as close to sane as possible. “It’s just good to talk to someone,” Merin said, his voice sounding relieved. “Someone other than Renarin, that is. He’s a good man, but he’s a little . . .” “Strange?” Shinri asked. “Strange,” Merin agreed. “I need to give you the bread and be going,” Shinri said, kneeling down. “I’ll be back, though.” “When?” “I don’t know,” Shinri said. “In a few days at most.” She slid open the feeding plate, then opened her basket. She paused, however. “There is something else,” she said, moving to hand him the bread. “The man you killed on the battlefield, the one whose Shardblade you earned. Can you remember anything about him?” Merin’s face appeared behind the plate. He frowned in confusion. “The man in Prallah?” he asked. “Yes.” He shrugged. “I don’t know. There wasn’t much time to think, and he wore full Shardplate. I didn’t see his face, only his horse charging toward the king.” Shinri kept her face expressionless as Merin accepted the bread. “Nothing else?” she asked. “There was nothing distinctive about him? Nothing you remember about him or his armor?” Merin paused. Then he suddenly grew excited, setting his bread on the 518 BR AN D O N SAN DE RS ON floor beside him. He grabbed a small rock from behind him and scratched something into the stone. “Do you recognize this glyph?” he asked eagerly. Shinri frowned at his awkward scrawl, obviously made by the hand of one who didn’t know proper slants or line orders. It was still recognizable, however, as nan, one of the more common glyphs. “Yes,” Shinri said. “Why?” “I found a rock carved with this symbol tucked inside the dead Shard- bearer’s gauntlet,” Merin said. “What does it mean?” Shinri’s frown deepened. The symbol was slightly off. It might have been Merin’s unpracticed hand, but there were a few extra lines. It looked almost like . . . Shinri couldn’t stop her slight intake of breath. “What?” Merin asked. “There’s something special about it, isn’t there? It’s a glyph of power. I . . . I think it’s magical somehow.” “Don’t be silly,” Shinri said. He’s just a peasant, she reminded herself. To most of them, all writing is mystical. Don’t snap at him. “The glyph means ‘lightning,’” she said. “I’ve seen it hundreds of times. There’s nothing magical about it.” “Why the reaction then?” Merin demanded. “Those lines you drew at the sides,” Shinri said. “They’re familiar to me. They make the symbol look very similar to a stylized glyph, the type used by noblemen to differentiate their various lines.” Merin frowned. “Well, whose glyph is this one?” Shinri closed her eyes, sitting back. “The queen’s,” she said. “Queen Nanavah.” “That doesn’t make any sense,” Merin complained. “Why would the Shardbearer be carrying it?” He wanted my sister. Even from a distance, Ahven’s words taunted her. He loved her with the deep, foolish love men reserve for something unattainable. “The stone,” Shinri said. “Carved with a lady’s glyph. It is a . . . sign of favor, given to a friend or loved one.” “You have to be wrong,” Merin said. I wish I was. “There’s no reason for the man to be carrying a stone carved with Queen Nanavah’s glyph,” Merin said. “Maybe I drew it wrong. I’m telling you, there was something magical about that glyph. I can’t really explain it, but trust me—it was there.” Maybe his mind has been affected by the captivity, Shinri thought, standing. “I’ll return,” she said, picking up her basket. THE WAY OF KINGS PRI M E 519 He never really wanted you, Ahven hissed in her mind. He couldn’t have— you were given to him freely. “Get me a Shardblade!” Merin repeated, his face appearing in the cell window. “I have to go help Lord Dalenar.” Shinri nodded, turning and walking down the hallway. Before, she’d had the benefit of presumption—as long as Ahven’s words had been her only proof of Tethren’s love of the queen, Shinri had been able to disbelieve. But now . . . The man is dead, Shinri told herself. Months gone. His infidelity shouldn’t matter. What power has he over you? “You were in there a long time,” the guard said as she passed. “Spent a while chatting, didn’t you?” Shinri paused, wrestling down her emotions and giving the guard a flat stare. “I had to make certain the prisoners were fit,” she said. “My only concern is that they be healthy enough to be of use to my husband.” “Of course,” the guard said, reclining in his chair. “Very good of you. Next time, bring some money.” Shinri thinned her eyes slightly at the man, then nodded and turned down the hallway to make her way back toward her chambers. chapter 57 LHAN 1 L han Radenmev had only ever been good at two things in his life. The first was avoiding responsibility. The second was helping people. Some called it altruism. That, however, was far too noble a word. Lhan understood himself, and—with all frankness—knew himself to be a selfish, lethargic man. However, he had always been interested in people. When growing up, his only inborn asset had been his tongue—he could get anyone to talk to him, even those who didn’t particularly like him. The variety he saw in personalities, attitudes, and opinions had fascinated him even as a child. Others thought that because Lhan had little regard for possessions, he was humble. That was a mistake. If Lhan ignored the baubles and finery that had delighted his brother, sister, and their noble friends, it was only because he was busy with objects far more splendid: people. The young Lhan had met as many individuals as he could, prompting them to speak, using his strange ability to put them at ease to discover their true opinions and emotions. He had a gift in his ability to make strangers open up and speak to him as if they were confiding in a spouse, rather than some random Shardbearer’s son. Lhan listened to their ramblings with rapt attention, collecting minds in the same way a wealthy merchant might gather precious works of art. The more interesting and strange the personality, the more excited Lhan was to speak with its owner. THE WAY OF KINGS PRI M E 521 The benefit his subjects gained from these discussions had been quite unexpected. He soon became a topic of discussion among the Kholinar elite; the ladies in their sitting groups would speak about Chaden Radenmev’s firstborn son. They referred to Lhan by all manner of praiseful adjectives— respectful, wise, sober. That last one had particularly bothered Lhan, and so he had decided to disprove it by getting himself quite drunk on his twelfth birthday. Lhan’s father hadn’t quite known what to do with the boy. In Lhan’s mind, Chaden had been anything but interesting. He was a straightforward, stout, bull of a man, a loyal Shardbearer to King Nolhonarin, but otherwise rather unimpressive. Looking back, Lhan thought that his father had probably been a very good and noble person, a man whose only crime had been being less clever than his son would have liked. At the time, however, Lhan had found his family incurably boring, and had instead preferred to spend his time with more lively subjects—such as the gossiping palace maids, or the men confined to the stocks in the courtyard, or even (when he could manage it) the mysterious Awakeners of Nolhonarin’s court. Regardless of the reasonings, Chaden hadn’t seen in Lhan the ‘wise young man’ that the court seemed to think he had spawned. To him, Lhan had just been a disrespectful slop of a boy who refused to learn proper discipline and who found great amusement in mocking his own father. Back then, people often told Lhan that his tongue would get him in trouble, but he usually quipped that there wasn’t any trouble his tongue could bring that his wit wouldn’t be able to solve. Then the day had come when his father had realized an amazing fact—that there was an easy, court-approved way to remove Lhan from the succession, thereby allowing Chaden to pass his Blade and title on to Lhan’s younger brother, a boy far more modest in both acumen and action. Lhan had found himself in the monastery the very next day. It hadn’t even been a scandal. People had often remarked that Chaden’s thoughtful little boy possessed a gift for helping people. What better place was there for such a person than in Peacehome monastery? No amount of wit had been able to free Lhan from the pact his father made—Lhan was Birthgiven, and would remain a monk until the day he died. At first, Lhan hadn’t realized how perfect the monastery was for him. After all, it gave him wonderful opportunities to develop both of his strengths: there had been no lack of responsibilities to avoid, and Peace- home—as an Order of Kavel monastery—saw a constant rotation of 522 BR AND O N SAN DE RS ON the poor, the wounded, and even the insane. Fascinating personalities abounded. It hadn’t taken long for Lhan to bless his father’s decision rather than resent it. The other monks had been surprised by Lhan’s willingness to work with the mad, but they had been more than willing to give him the duty—in many of their minds, it was a fitting punishment for his fondness of avoiding work. Only the wizened Peacehome First Monk had seen some of the truth in Lhan’s motivations. The man had never gone so far as to forbid Lhan’s work with the insane, but he had always warned—as if speaking with the same spirit as those who had spoken of Lhan’s trouble- making tongue—that Lhan’s fascination with madmen would eventually lead him to poor ends. For the first time in his life, Lhan had a mind to agree with the old corpse. What was Lhan—lover of peaceful mornings, relaxing afternoons, and quiet evenings—doing on a cliffside in northern Riemak? Why was he standing beside soldiers and Shardbearers, holding a spear as if he thought he might know what to do with it? The idea was so ridiculous that, at times, he laughed. And yet, there he was, standing in the evening light, wearied from marching, drawn halfway across the continent by the most fascinating personality he had ever found. Taln stood at the very edge of the cliffside, scanning the rock plains below them. Apparently, northern Riemak was a progressive gradient, the land rising to what would eventually become the desolate stormlands of Kavenar. Several days before, the group had arrived at a set of step-like plateaus leading up. Lhan cringed when he remembered lugging his pack all the way up those switchbacks. There were apparently more plateaus ahead, but they had passed the greater deal of the climbing. The land they would now have to travel consisted of a series of broken plateaus, the stone pocketed and slashed by rainchannels. It was colder than Lhan would have expected, despite it being the Searing, and the winds swept across the army’s line unbroken and strong. He hated to think how it would feel in a highstorm. Taln the Madman looked down toward the path they had taken just a few days before, scanning for something the scouts had reported. Of all the minds Lhan had seen, this was the strangest. At first,
