---
work: The Way of Kings
author: Brandon Sanderson
passage_id: s05
kind: scene
word_count: 3510
source_chapters:
- 72
notes: scene-aligned chunk; see tools/sample_scenes.py. start_chapter_idx=71.
---

of Alethkar. Now that she had true control, however, she had led her followers nearly to their dooms. Meridas was right. She had failed. The reason was obvious. She shouldn’t have listened to Taln. Shortly before, she had spoken bold words about the madman’s return, but Meridas had seen through them. Taln wasn’t coming back, and why should she hope for him to? Giving heed to Taln’s judgement had brought her to disaster. Why? Why was she such a fool? She knew he was mad, and yet she gave him leave to do virtually whatever he wished. She had also made too many concessions to Meridas. He had been the first one to bring unnecessary troops along, simply because he wanted to wrestle command from her. And, foolishly, she had given him leave. Politics was a game of compromise and balance. Commanding troops, however, required absolute strength and no concessions. She had played one as if it were the other, never understanding the difference. And now she had failed. The wind curled around her stones, pulling up the cloth and spraying her with a fresh burst of rain. She couldn’t even blame her failure on Taln, not with any seriousness. He couldn’t help himself. He had proven that he could not distinguish THE WAY OF KINGS PRI M E 639 between reality and fiction. He truly thought that the Holy City would hold a solution to their problems. She should have been more clear-headed. Taln had pulled her along with his delusions, despite her resistance, and now he was dead. The storm finally blew itself out, the rains falling slack and the wind slowing to a slight breeze. Jasnah remained curled in her makeshift tent, back pressed against the uncomfortable stone, face and body draped by the thick canopy cloth. Chill water trickled down her face. She had to find another way. She had to think. She couldn’t let Meridas sell the people that had come to the army, men who had come answering her subtle prompting. She had been the one to encourage Taln’s reputation, the one determined to manipulate his madness into giving her an army. The people were her responsibility. Taln was dead, but he was not the only one that could resist Meridas. She would find a way. Perhaps— Jasnah paused, suddenly coming alert. She had heard something. Some- thing that sounded like . . . Hoofbeats. The camp was under attack. She threw off her cloth covering, spraying droplets of rainwater into the night air, and scrambled to her feet. Her intended call of warning, however, never left her throat. Jasnah froze, staring at the monstrous creature that stood before her in the darkness. It seemed to absorb the starlight, a massive black scar, darker even than the sky behind it. It stood twice her height, and a pair of twisting wings billowed in the air behind it, their motion a furtive and abstract black upon black. The body was a bulbous mass, indistinct, with strangely placed limbs. She could make out no details, but she could feel that it was there. The thing seemed to pull upon her, weakening her, taking her life and replacing it with awful, horrifying despair. Fear wouldn’t let her scream; it wouldn’t even let her shiver. Stories she’d heard since childhood, stories that frightened even the aged, told of the death that came with highstorms. Demons. Khothen. Stormshades. A light sputtered to life a short distance away—one of her guards lighting a lantern. The illumination dispelled both darkness and imagination, taking away the fear and replacing it with reality. The light revealed no monster, but instead a man, sitting on horseback, his cloak fluttering in the wind behind him. His head was bowed slightly, leaving the eyes and face darkened, but she recognized the powerful, lean body and the Shardblade tied at the horse’s flank. 640 BR AN D O N SAN DE RS ON “Taln,” she whispered. He seemed . . . tired. His body slumped in the saddle slightly, and when he looked up, his face was wearied. His eyes were dark with something beyond lack of light, and the weak illumination left his face pocked and haunted with shadows. He turned, sliding out of the saddle and landing firmly on the wet stone despite his obvious fatigue, then reached over and twisted the Shardblade, allowing the supernaturally sharp edge to slice away its own bonds. He turned, standing before her. A short distance away, the guard set down his lantern then ran to spread the news. Taln stared down at her, half of his face hidden in darkness. Standing before her as he was, he seemed massive—like a boulder, not a man. She reached a hand forward, to­ ward him, but stopped. She pulled the arm back, against her sodden chest. “It is done,” Taln said quietly. “What?” Jasnah asked. “Those who followed no longer hunt this people.” Jasnah shivered within her wet clothing. For the first time, she noticed that Taln’s outfit was colored with irregular darkness. Blood stains. His face was smeared with something that looked like soot, though most of it had washed away in the storm. “You fought them all?” Jasnah asked. “A thousand men?” Taln smiled, the weak expression eerie in the darkness. “No,” he said. “Herald I may be, but I have the body of a man. With my powers, and with a small passway to defend . . . perhaps I could have fought them, for a time. Without either, I had to use other methods. The ones that still live will not continue the chase.” On the other side of the camp, lights winked to life as people woke. The stir seemed to be going too quickly—pieces of the camp were awakening that couldn’t possibly have gotten the news yet. “What . . . ?” she asked. “That will be Kemnar,” Taln said, stepping away from her and seating himself on one of her boulders with a deep sigh. “With the horses, and our captive.” “Captive?” Jasnah asked. “Go and see,” Taln said. He no longer seemed dark or menacing, only . . . exhausted. Like a man who bore some great weight. He looked up at her, and for the first time since his arrival she saw in him the man she had known. “Go ahead,” he said. “I’ll be fine. I just need to . . . rest.” Jasnah nodded, though she was hesitant to leave him. The irrational side THE WAY OF KINGS PRI M E 641 of her worried that he wouldn’t be there when she returned. She forced herself into motion, ignoring the cold winds and her numb, shivering body. She hurried across the camp, seeking out the source of the far disturbance. As she did so, she heard ecstatic calls of ‘The Herald has returned!’ She had to force herself not to join in the celebrations. Taln had returned. That didn’t, of course, mean that her problems had been fixed—they were still out of food, and they were still marching toward a hostile army four times their size—but suddenly everything seemed easier to face. It was silly, she knew, but never had she been so happy to be proven wrong. There were about two tenset horses in all. Jasnah found them at the edge of the camp. Kemnar stood nearby, carefully giving a group of soldiers instructions on equine care. He smiled when he saw her, then turned back to his explanation. All of the animals bore saddles and saddlebags, but none of them bore mounts—save one. As soon as she saw him, she realized why Kemnar was having so much trouble keeping the other soldiers’ attention. The newcomer wore black. His features were obviously inhuman, which meant he had been an Awakener for a long time indeed. His face was . . . sharp, and too linear. Like most Awakeners, it was hard to distinguish specific differences between his face and those of a regular person. The fine edges of his features, such as the nose and eyes, were just . . . too distinct. The smoothed parts, such as the cheeks, were too smooth. He didn’t blink—in fact, he didn’t even move. Not a muscle twitched as he sat, looking toward Kemnar. And then, he was looking at her. Jasnah started. The man hadn’t seemed to move at all. Instead, it was as if . . . he had simply ceased to be in one location, and appeared in a second. He sat there, staring at her for a long moment, drawing her attention so soundly that she jumped when Kemnar touched her elbow. “Unnerving, eh?” he asked. “I can never catch him moving, even if I’m looking at him when he does. It’s like he isn’t real, but a series of paintings of a person, each in a slightly different position.” Jasnah nodded. The creature was still staring at her. “Where . . . ?” “He was with the Veden army,” Kemnar said. “That’s how they moved so quickly. They didn’t have to carry food with them, or even stop to gather water. Taln’s saddlebags carry a sack of emeralds as big as your head, and mine carry another one filled with zircons.” Kemnar paused, and when he continued, she could hear discomfort in his voice. “Convenient way to 642 BR AN D O N SAN DE RS ON travel, I guess, if you can put up with the company. Those things are . . .” He trailed off, his voice becoming guilty. He’d forgotten that I’m one of them. She forced herself to turn from the creature, instead looking at Kemnar. He was a bit ragged and tired from a long ride, but overall he looked well. He’d let his beard get a little longer than he usually did, but there was an excited twinkle in his eyes. “You have news,” she said. “What happened out there? What did he do to the invaders?” “I don’t know everything,” Kemnar said. “But I can guess.” “Why don’t you know for certain?” Jasnah asked. “Weren’t you with him?” Kemnar shook his head as the two of them backed away from the ring of torches and the men caring for the newly-acquired horses. “No,” he continued. “Taln lost me the second day of our travels—he was gone when I woke up. Do you have any idea how hard it is to track a single person in the stormlands? Fortunately, I knew the general direction of the army. I found them, but . . .” “What?” Jasnah prompted. “Well,” Kemnar said. “Everything seemed normal, and there was no sign of Taln. The army stopped for the night, and I made my own camp a short ways back. That night there was a disturbance. I didn’t know what it was at the time, but I talked to some deserters a few days later. Apparently, someone had killed every single one of the guards on watch that night. He left the bodies, decapitated, beside their watch posts, with strange patterns carved into the ground around them. I saw some of these when I followed the army the next day. Taln obviously cut them with his Shardblade, but the army didn’t know that. They only saw eerie patterns in the stone, odd things that looked kind of like glyphs, but somehow not quite right.” Jasnah frowned. “He was trying to scare them?” Kemnar smiled in the wan light. “Yes, and it worked. Each night, Taln killed every man set on watch, until they began to set their watches closer and closer and set more and more men up at night. That, however, only made the army more tired when it marched the next day—slowing it considerably. Then Taln started killing the scouts and their horses too. Soon, no one wanted to ride point, and the scouts they did send always stayed within view of the army. This slowed them even further, since they couldn’t watch for gullies or wash-outs. “If they sent out patrols to villages, those patrols never returned. If THE WAY OF KINGS PRI M E 643 anyone went to the privy alone at night, they were found beheaded when morning came. By the fourth day, the desertions began—and Taln let them leave without being killed. Well, that probably didn’t help morale any, and soon the Vedens had to set watches on their own men. Taln even got into camp sometimes and killed these watches, though I don’t know how he did it unseen.” Kemnar stopped. “And?” Jasnah said. “And that’s all I know,” he confessed. “The next night, he found me and told me not to follow any more. He gave me a few horses that he had stolen, kept one for himself, and told me to stay where I was. He said that if he didn’t return in three days, I was to ride and find you and tell you what I knew.” “And you did what he commanded?” Jasnah asked with annoyance. “You stayed there?” “My lady,” Kemnar said flatly. “He was not in a mood to be disobeyed. I thought it wise to accommodate him.” Jasnah paused, thinking back to the dark, unnerving expression Taln had borne when he first arrived back in camp. “All right,” she said. “There’s little we can do about it now. What happened then? He returned, I assume?” Kemnar nodded. “There was a highstorm late the next evening—that was four days ago—and he found me a day later. He led a group of horses, one of them bearing the Awakener. When I asked him about the army, he simply said that it would follow us no more.” Jasnah folded her arms in dissatisfaction. Kemnar looked away guiltily, and she saw—really saw—for the first time how tired he was. “Go and get something warm to eat,” she told him, “then get some rest. I’ll deal with Talenel.” Kemnar smiled. “Thank you, my lady,” he said, bowing. Then he dis- appeared into the night. Jasnah stood, watching the men remove saddles and hobble the horses, another bringing grain for the beasts to eat. The Awakener climbed down from his mount, and it was as Kemnar had said— he didn’t seem to move. It was as if with him, her eyes didn’t work—they registered him as if she were blinking rapidly, only catching sight of him for brief glimpses, each one freezing him mid-motion. Yet he changed positions from sitting horseback to standing beside the animal—he just did it without any apparent motion. Jasnah shivered as she watched, though this time it really was from the cold. Her sodden clothing was plastered to her skin—it probably wouldn’t 644 BR AN D O N SAN DE RS ON dry until it got sunlight the next day. Suddenly, someone set a cloak on her shoulders. It was wet too, but was still warm from the body that had worn it, and her skin relished the delightful heat. It was far too big for her. “He’s a Taln Pole,” Taln said from beside her, looking at the Awakener. “The Essence, I mean. Stone. He’s only moderately strong, but he should be able to make enough grain to keep the army fed—at least, on half rations. It would be unwise to overtax him.” Jasnah pulled the cloak tighter. Taln looked down at her, meeting her eyes, and smiled. The shadows she had seen in him before were still there, but they were masked now. “I’ll tell you,” he said, obviously noting the question in her eyes, “but not right now. Later.” She sighed. “Very well.” He nodded thankfully. She looked down, away from his face. “Taln, I . . . I didn’t think you would return. I assumed you were dead, that whatever you had planned, it had failed. I told Meridas otherwise, but he saw the truth in me. I didn’t trust you.” She didn’t know why she spoke; her words sounded foolish in her ears. Yet she felt a need to somehow explain herself, to expose what now seemed like such a betrayal. He chuckled. “I half expected to die myself,” he said. “Almost did, actually. But then I felt it.” “It?” Jasnah asked. Taln held up his Blade—his own sword, the one he had taken back from Meridas the night before he left. “The presence of my brethren,” he said. “I feel them, through the sword. They’re here, Jasnah. Ahead, in the Holy City. They’re waiting for me. I couldn’t die, not until I had found them and knew they would see to your safety.” He raised his head, nodding toward the camp. “To all of your safety.” Jasnah frowned. He obviously still held to his delusions. And yet, she had thought that Lhan was delusional for saying that Taln would survive. She looked up at Taln. So humble, yet so strong. So innocent, yet still intelligent. Could she trust without believing? For a moment, she was almost willing to do so. “What would they be doing there?” she asked. “Your brethren, I mean. Jorevan is ruled by a tyrant.” “Someone controls the Holy City?” Taln asked. Jasnah nodded. “He calls himself Lord Aneazer, and he claims to rule the surrounding area, dominating the nearby towns.” Taln frowned. “He has an army, then?” THE WAY OF KINGS PRI M E 645 “A large one,” Jasnah said. “At least, for a single city, and for a despot in Riemak.” Taln nodded knowingly. “It makes sense. This wouldn’t be the first time we’ve been forced to work with undesirable allies, assuming there were no others to be found.” “It’s going to be difficult to get you into the city,” Jasnah warned. “We’ll manage it,” Taln said, smiling. She smiled, then paused, her logical side giving whispered warning. “Taln,” she finally said. “Remember your promise. If they aren’t there, if . . . for some reason, we don’t find the Heralds, you said you’d return with me to Alethkar.” Taln just shook his head. He reached out, touching her lightly on the shoulder, and Jasnah felt herself blush slightly. “Ah, Lady Kholin,” he said. “Someday you’re going to have to lose that skepticism of yours. We’ll find them, you’ll see. You’re just going to have to learn to trust me.” Trust me. His hand remained on her shoulder, almost tender in its touch. Finally she just shook her head. “Well,” she said, “we shall see. For now, let’s take you to Meridas. I wouldn’t want to miss his expression when he sees for himself that you have returned from the dead.” chapter 69 DALENAR 6 E ach boy Dalenar struck down seemed to have the face of one of his sons. Aredor died a tenset times before him, his eyes those of every Shardbearer Dalenar slew. Poor Renarin seemed to be every frightened spearman, boys with lives and loves, but whose worth was rendered as naught because they couldn’t face a Shardblade. Even Sheneres, now years dead, appeared in the proud faces of the noblemen Dalenar fought. Dalenar killed them anyway. This was war; this was death. Through most of the Pralir campaign he had remained at the command tower, directing the carnage from afar. This time he could not stay back—he could not order his soldiers to kill their cousins and brothers while he rested far from the terrible work. So, he fought amidst them, Shardblade making the air red with his guilt. He killed tensets of men. He fought with the horrible, full capacity of a Shardbearer—a warrior virtually untouchable by regular troops. And yet, that didn’t stop them. The men were Aleth soldiers, well-trained and disci- plined. They attacked with coordination, knowing that it was occasionally possible for a group of twenty to pull down a Shardbearer then slip past his armor with knives or spearheads. They knew that if someone didn’t face Dalenar, he would simply cut through their ranks, decimating them anyway. And so they died. Occasionally, one of Elhokar’s remaining Shardbear- ers would appear to challenge Dalenar, and a duel would follow. Dalenar THE WAY OF KINGS PRI M E 647 followed Protocol, but it was a dirty, battlefield kind of Protocol. He had slain five Shardbearers before the afternoon sun was overhead—most of them young men who had, just months before, fought for honor in the dueling competition. Dalenar faced courtly acquaintances, distant cousins, and even friends. These were the worst, for he knew some of them to be men of honor—men who believed that it was their duty to follow the throne regardless of the king’s actions. Dalenar understood their decision; in slightly different circumstances, he knew he would be with them, fighting at Elhokar’s side. He killed them. Somewhere near late afternoon, he began to lose the melancholy reticence that had afflicted him for most of the Pralir campaign. Old spirits awakened—passions that were a memory of the old Dalenar, the man before he became known as Tyrantbane, the man who had slain hundreds on the battlefield, and had enjoyed every moment
