---
work: The Sun Also Rises
author: Ernest Hemingway
passage_id: s05
kind: scene
word_count: 4459
source_chapters:
- 18
notes: scene-aligned chunk; see tools/sample_scenes.py. start_chapter_idx=17.
---

CHAPTER
                                   16


In the morning it was raining. A fog had come over the mountains from
the sea. You could not see the tops of the mountains. The plateau was
dull and gloomy, and the shapes of the trees and the houses were
changed. I walked out beyond the town to look at the weather. The bad
weather was coming over the mountains from the sea.

The flags in the square hung wet from the white poles and the banners
were wet and hung damp against the front of the houses, and in between
the steady drizzle the rain came down and drove every one under the
arcades and made pools of water in the square, and the streets wet and
dark and deserted; yet the fiesta kept up without any pause. It was only
driven under cover.

The covered seats of the bull-ring had been crowded with people sitting
out of the rain watching the concourse of Basque and Navarrais dancers
and singers, and afterward the Val Carlos dancers in their costumes
danced down the street in the rain, the drums sounding hollow and damp,
and the chiefs of the bands riding ahead on their big, heavy-footed
horses, their costumes wet, the horses’ coats wet in the rain. The crowd
was in the cafés and the dancers came in, too, and sat, their
tight-wound white legs under the tables, shaking the water from their
belled caps, and spreading their red and purple jackets over the chairs
to dry. It was raining hard outside.

I left the crowd in the café and went over to the hotel to get shaved
for dinner. I was shaving in my room when there was a knock on the door.

“Come in,” I called.

Montoya walked in.

“How are you?” he said.

“Fine,” I said.

“No bulls to-day.”

“No,” I said, “nothing but rain.”

“Where are your friends?”

“Over at the Iruña.”

Montoya smiled his embarrassed smile.

“Look,” he said. “Do you know the American ambassador?”

“Yes,” I said. “Everybody knows the American ambassador.”

“He’s here in town, now.”

“Yes,” I said. “Everybody’s seen them.”

“I’ve seen them, too,” Montoya said. He didn’t say anything. I went on
shaving.

“Sit down,” I said. “Let me send for a drink.”

“No, I have to go.”

I finished shaving and put my face down into the bowl and washed it with
cold water. Montoya was standing there looking more embarrassed.

“Look,” he said. “I’ve just had a message from them at the Grand Hotel
that they want Pedro Romero and Marcial Lalanda to come over for coffee
to-night after dinner.”

“Well,” I said, “it can’t hurt Marcial any.”

“Marcial has been in San Sebastian all day. He drove over in a car this
morning with Marquez. I don’t think they’ll be back to-night.”

Montoya stood embarrassed. He wanted me to say something.

“Don’t give Romero the message,” I said.

“You think so?”

“Absolutely.”

Montoya was very pleased.

“I wanted to ask you because you were an American,” he said.

“That’s what I’d do.”

“Look,” said Montoya. “People take a boy like that. They don’t know what
he’s worth. They don’t know what he means. Any foreigner can flatter
him. They start this Grand Hotel business, and in one year they’re
through.”

“Like Algabeno,” I said.

“Yes, like Algabeno.”

“They’re a fine lot,” I said. “There’s one American woman down here now
that collects bull-fighters.”

“I know. They only want the young ones.”

“Yes,” I said. “The old ones get fat.”

“Or crazy like Gallo.”

“Well,” I said, “it’s easy. All you have to do is not give him the
message.”

“He’s such a fine boy,” said Montoya. “He ought to stay with his own
people. He shouldn’t mix in that stuff.”

“Won’t you have a drink?” I asked.

“No,” said Montoya, “I have to go.” He went out.

I went down-stairs and out the door and took a walk around through the
arcades around the square. It was still raining. I looked in at the
Iruña for the gang and they were not there, so I walked on around the
square and back to the hotel. They were eating dinner in the down-stairs
dining-room.

They were well ahead of me and it was no use trying to catch them. Bill
was buying shoe-shines for Mike. Bootblacks opened the street door and
each one Bill called over and started to work on Mike.

“This is the eleventh time my boots have been polished,” Mike said. “I
say, Bill is an ass.”

The bootblacks had evidently spread the report. Another came in.

“Limpia botas?” he said to Bill.

“No,” said Bill. “For this Señor.”

The bootblack knelt down beside the one at work and started on Mike’s
free shoe that shone already in the electric light.

“Bill’s a yell of laughter,” Mike said.

I was drinking red wine, and so far behind them that I felt a little
uncomfortable about all this shoe-shining. I looked around the room. At
the next table was Pedro Romero. He stood up when I nodded, and asked me
to come over and meet a friend. His table was beside ours, almost
touching. I met the friend, a Madrid bull-fight critic, a little man
with a drawn face. I told Romero how much I liked his work, and he was
very pleased. We talked Spanish and the critic knew a little French. I
reached to our table for my wine-bottle, but the critic took my arm.
Romero laughed.

“Drink here,” he said in English.

He was very bashful about his English, but he was really very pleased
with it, and as we went on talking he brought out words he was not sure
of, and asked me about them. He was anxious to know the English for
_Corrida de toros_, the exact translation. Bull-fight he was suspicious
of. I explained that bull-fight in Spanish was the _lidia_ of a _toro_.
The Spanish word _corrida_ means in English the running of bulls—the
French translation is _Course de taureaux_. The critic put that in.
There is no Spanish word for bull-fight.

Pedro Romero said he had learned a little English in Gibraltar. He was
born in Ronda. That is not far above Gibraltar. He started bull-fighting
in Malaga in the bull-fighting school there. He had only been at it
three years. The bull-fight critic joked him about the number of
_Malagueño_ expressions he used. He was nineteen years old, he said. His
older brother was with him as a banderillero, but he did not live in
this hotel. He lived in a smaller hotel with the other people who worked
for Romero. He asked me how many times I had seen him in the ring. I
told him only three. It was really only two, but I did not want to
explain after I had made the mistake.

“Where did you see me the other time? In Madrid?”

“Yes,” I lied. I had read the accounts of his two appearances in Madrid
in the bull-fight papers, so I was all right.

“The first or the second time?”

“The first.”

“I was very bad,” he said. “The second time I was better. You remember?”
He turned to the critic.

He was not at all embarrassed. He talked of his work as something
altogether apart from himself. There was nothing conceited or braggartly
about him.

“I like it very much that you like my work,” he said. “But you haven’t
seen it yet. To-morrow, if I get a good bull, I will try and show it to
you.”

When he said this he smiled, anxious that neither the bull-fight critic
nor I would think he was boasting.

“I am anxious to see it,” the critic said. “I would like to be
convinced.”

“He doesn’t like my work much.” Romero turned to me. He was serious.

The critic explained that he liked it very much, but that so far it had
been incomplete.

“Wait till to-morrow, if a good one comes out.”

“Have you seen the bulls for to-morrow?” the critic asked me.

“Yes. I saw them unloaded.”

Pedro Romero leaned forward.

“What did you think of them?”

“Very nice,” I said. “About twenty-six arrobas. Very short horns.
Haven’t you seen them?”

“Oh, yes,” said Romero.

“They won’t weigh twenty-six arrobas,” said the critic.

“No,” said Romero.

“They’ve got bananas for horns,” the critic said.

“You call them bananas?” asked Romero. He turned to me and smiled.
“_You_ wouldn’t call them bananas?”

“No,” I said. “They’re horns all right.”

“They’re very short,” said Pedro Romero. “Very, very short. Still, they
aren’t bananas.”

“I say, Jake,” Brett called from the next table, “you _have_ deserted
us.”

“Just temporarily,” I said. “We’re talking bulls.”

“You _are_ superior.”

“Tell him that bulls have no balls,” Mike shouted. He was drunk.

Romero looked at me inquiringly.

“Drunk,” I said. “Borracho! Muy borracho!”

“You might introduce your friends,” Brett said. She had not stopped
looking at Pedro Romero. I asked them if they would like to have coffee
with us. They both stood up. Romero’s face was very brown. He had very
nice manners.

I introduced them all around and they started to sit down, but there was
not enough room, so we all moved over to the big table by the wall to
have coffee. Mike ordered a bottle of Fundador and glasses for
everybody. There was a lot of drunken talking.

“Tell him I think writing is lousy,” Bill said. “Go on, tell him. Tell
him I’m ashamed of being a writer.”

Pedro Romero was sitting beside Brett and listening to her.

“Go on. Tell him!” Bill said.

Romero looked up smiling.

“This gentleman,” I said, “is a writer.”

Romero was impressed. “This other one, too,” I said, pointing at Cohn.

“He looks like Villalta,” Romero said, looking at Bill. “Rafael, doesn’t
he look like Villalta?”

“I can’t see it,” the critic said.

“Really,” Romero said in Spanish. “He looks a lot like Villalta. What
does the drunken one do?”

“Nothing.”

“Is that why he drinks?”

“No. He’s waiting to marry this lady.”

“Tell him bulls have no balls!” Mike shouted, very drunk, from the other
end of the table.

“What does he say?”

“He’s drunk.”

“Jake,” Mike called. “Tell him bulls have no balls!”

“You understand?” I said.

“Yes.”

I was sure he didn’t, so it was all right.

“Tell him Brett wants to see him put on those green pants.”

“Pipe down, Mike.”

“Tell him Brett is dying to know how he can get into those pants.”

“Pipe down.”

During this Romero was fingering his glass and talking with Brett. Brett
was talking French and he was talking Spanish and a little English, and
laughing.

Bill was filling the glasses.

“Tell him Brett wants to come into——”

“Oh, pipe down, Mike, for Christ’s sake!”

Romero looked up smiling. “Pipe down! I know that,” he said.

Just then Montoya came into the room. He started to smile at me, then he
saw Pedro Romero with a big glass of cognac in his hand, sitting
laughing between me and a woman with bare shoulders, at a table full of
drunks. He did not even nod.

Montoya went out of the room. Mike was on his feet proposing a toast.
“Let’s all drink to—” he began. “Pedro Romero,” I said. Everybody stood
up. Romero took it very seriously, and we touched glasses and drank it
down, I rushing it a little because Mike was trying to make it clear
that that was not at all what he was going to drink to. But it went off
all right, and Pedro Romero shook hands with every one and he and the
critic went out together.

“My God! he’s a lovely boy,” Brett said. “And how I would love to see
him get into those clothes. He must use a shoe-horn.”

“I started to tell him,” Mike began. “And Jake kept interrupting me. Why
do you interrupt me? Do you think you talk Spanish better than I do?”

“Oh, shut up, Mike! Nobody interrupted you.”

“No, I’d like to get this settled.” He turned away from me. “Do you
think you amount to something, Cohn? Do you think you belong here among
us? People who are out to have a good time? For God’s sake don’t be so
noisy, Cohn!”

“Oh, cut it out, Mike,” Cohn said.

“Do you think Brett wants you here? Do you think you add to the party?
Why don’t you say something?”

“I said all I had to say the other night, Mike.”

“I’m not one of you literary chaps.” Mike stood shakily and leaned
against the table. “I’m not clever. But I do know when I’m not wanted.
Why don’t you see when you’re not wanted, Cohn? Go away. Go away, for
God’s sake. Take that sad Jewish face away. Don’t you think I’m right?”

He looked at us.

“Sure,” I said. “Let’s all go over to the Iruña.”

“No. Don’t you think I’m right? I love that woman.”

“Oh, don’t start that again. Do shove it along, Michael,” Brett said.

“Don’t you think I’m right, Jake?”

Cohn still sat at the table. His face had the sallow, yellow look it got
when he was insulted, but somehow he seemed to be enjoying it. The
childish, drunken heroics of it. It was his affair with a lady of title.

“Jake,” Mike said. He was almost crying. “You know I’m right. Listen,
you!” He turned to Cohn: “Go away! Go away now!”

“But I won’t go, Mike,” said Cohn.

“Then I’ll make you!” Mike started toward him around the table. Cohn
stood up and took off his glasses. He stood waiting, his face sallow,
his hands fairly low, proudly and firmly waiting for the assault, ready
to do battle for his lady love.

I grabbed Mike. “Come on to the café,” I said. “You can’t hit him here
in the hotel.”

“Good!” said Mike. “Good idea!”

We started off. I looked back as Mike stumbled up the stairs and saw
Cohn putting his glasses on again. Bill was sitting at the table pouring
another glass of Fundador. Brett was sitting looking straight ahead at
nothing.

Outside on the square it had stopped raining and the moon was trying to
get through the clouds. There was a wind blowing. The military band was
playing and the crowd was massed on the far side of the square where the
fireworks specialist and his son were trying to send up fire balloons. A
balloon would start up jerkily, on a great bias, and be torn by the wind
or blown against the houses of the square. Some fell into the crowd. The
magnesium flared and the fireworks exploded and chased about in the
crowd. There was no one dancing in the square. The gravel was too wet.

Brett came out with Bill and joined us. We stood in the crowd and
watched Don Manuel Orquito, the fireworks king, standing on a little
platform, carefully starting the balloons with sticks, standing above
the heads of the crowd to launch the balloons off into the wind. The
wind brought them all down, and Don Manuel Orquito’s face was sweaty in
the light of his complicated fireworks that fell into the crowd and
charged and chased, sputtering and cracking, between the legs of the
people. The people shouted as each new luminous paper bubble careened,
caught fire, and fell.

“They’re razzing Don Manuel,” Bill said.

“How do you know he’s Don Manuel?” Brett said.

“His name’s on the programme. Don Manuel Orquito, the pirotecnico of
esta ciudad.”

“Globos illuminados,” Mike said. “A collection of globos illuminados.
That’s what the paper said.”

The wind blew the band music away.

“I say, I wish one would go up,” Brett said. “That Don Manuel chap is
furious.”

“He’s probably worked for weeks fixing them to go off, spelling out
‘Hail to San Fermin,’” Bill said.

“Globos illuminados,” Mike said. “A bunch of bloody globos illuminados.”

“Come on,” said Brett. “We can’t stand here.”

“Her ladyship wants a drink,” Mike said.

“How you know things,” Brett said.

Inside, the café was crowded and very noisy. No one noticed us come in.
We could not find a table. There was a great noise going on.

“Come on, let’s get out of here,” Bill said.

Outside the paseo was going in under the arcade. There were some English
and Americans from Biarritz in sport clothes scattered at the tables.
Some of the women stared at the people going by with lorgnons. We had
acquired, at some time, a friend of Bill’s from Biarritz. She was
staying with another girl at the Grand Hotel. The other girl had a
headache and had gone to bed.

“Here’s the pub,” Mike said. It was the Bar Milano, a small, tough bar
where you could get food and where they danced in the back room. We all
sat down at a table and ordered a bottle of Fundador. The bar was not
full. There was nothing going on.

“This is a hell of a place,” Bill said.

“It’s too early.”

“Let’s take the bottle and come back later,” Bill said. “I don’t want to
sit here on a night like this.”

“Let’s go and look at the English,” Mike said. “I love to look at the
English.”

“They’re awful,” Bill said. “Where did they all come from?”

“They come from Biarritz,” Mike said, “They come to see the last day of
the quaint little Spanish fiesta.”

“I’ll festa them,” Bill said.

“You’re an extraordinarily beautiful girl.” Mike turned to Bill’s
friend. “When did you come here?”

“Come off it, Michael.”

“I say, she _is_ a lovely girl. Where have I been? Where have I been
looking all this while? You’re a lovely thing. _Have_ we met? Come along
with me and Bill. We’re going to festa the English.”

“I’ll festa them,” Bill said, “What the hell are they doing at this
fiesta?”

“Come on,” Mike said. “Just us three. We’re going to festa the bloody
English. I hope you’re not English? I’m Scotch. I hate the English. I’m
going to festa them. Come on, Bill.”

Through the window we saw them, all three arm in arm, going toward the
café. Rockets were going up in the square.

“I’m going to sit here,” Brett said.

“I’ll stay with you,” Cohn said.

“Oh, don’t!” Brett said. “For God’s sake, go off somewhere. Can’t you
see Jake and I want to talk?”

“I didn’t,” Cohn said. “I thought I’d sit here because I felt a little
tight.”

“What a hell of a reason for sitting with any one. If you’re tight, go
to bed. Go on to bed.”

“Was I rude enough to him?” Brett asked. Cohn was gone. “My God! I’m so
sick of him!”

“He doesn’t add much to the gayety.”

“He depresses me so.”

“He’s behaved very badly.”

“Damned badly. He had a chance to behave so well.”

“He’s probably waiting just outside the door now.”

“Yes. He would. You know I do know how he feels. He can’t believe it
didn’t mean anything.”

“I know.”

“Nobody else would behave as badly. Oh, I’m so sick of the whole thing.
And Michael. Michael’s been lovely, too.”

“It’s been damned hard on Mike.”

“Yes. But he didn’t need to be a swine.”

“Everybody behaves badly,” I said. “Give them the proper chance.”

“You wouldn’t behave badly.” Brett looked at me.

“I’d be as big an ass as Cohn,” I said.

“Darling, don’t let’s talk a lot of rot.”

“All right. Talk about anything you like.”

“Don’t be difficult. You’re the only person I’ve got, and I feel rather
awful to-night.”

“You’ve got Mike.”

“Yes, Mike. Hasn’t he been pretty?”

“Well,” I said, “it’s been damned hard on Mike, having Cohn around and
seeing him with you.”

“Don’t I know it, darling? Please don’t make me feel any worse than I
do.”

Brett was nervous as I had never seen her before. She kept looking away
from me and looking ahead at the wall.

“Want to go for a walk?”

“Yes. Come on.”

I corked up the Fundador bottle and gave it to the bartender.

“Let’s have one more drink of that,” Brett said. “My nerves are rotten.”

We each drank a glass of the smooth amontillado brandy.

“Come on,” said Brett.

As we came out the door I saw Cohn walk out from under the arcade.

“He _was_ there,” Brett said.

“He can’t be away from you.”

“Poor devil!”

“I’m not sorry for him. I hate him, myself.”

“I hate him, too,” she shivered. “I hate his damned suffering.”

We walked arm in arm down the side street away from the crowd and the
lights of the square. The street was dark and wet, and we walked along
it to the fortifications at the edge of town. We passed wine-shops with
light coming out from their doors onto the black, wet street, and sudden
bursts of music.

“Want to go in?”

“No.”

We walked out across the wet grass and onto the stone wall of the
fortifications. I spread a newspaper on the stone and Brett sat down.
Across the plain it was dark, and we could see the mountains. The wind
was high up and took the clouds across the moon. Below us were the dark
pits of the fortifications. Behind were the trees and the shadow of the
cathedral, and the town silhouetted against the moon.

“Don’t feel bad,” I said.

“I feel like hell,” Brett said. “Don’t let’s talk.”

We looked out at the plain. The long lines of trees were dark in the
moonlight. There were the lights of a car on the road climbing the
mountain. Up on the top of the mountain we saw the lights of the fort.
Below to the left was the river. It was high from the rain, and black
and smooth. Trees were dark along the banks. We sat and looked out.
Brett stared straight ahead. Suddenly she shivered.

“It’s cold.”

“Want to walk back?”

“Through the park.”

We climbed down. It was clouding over again. In the park it was dark
under the trees.

“Do you still love me, Jake?”

“Yes,” I said.

“Because I’m a goner,” Brett said.

“How?”

“I’m a goner. I’m mad about the Romero boy. I’m in love with him, I
think.”

“I wouldn’t be if I were you.”

“I can’t help it. I’m a goner. It’s tearing me all up inside.”

“Don’t do it.”

“I can’t help it. I’ve never been able to help anything.”

“You ought to stop it.”

“How can I stop it? I can’t stop things. Feel that?”

Her hand was trembling.

“I’m like that all through.”

“You oughtn’t to do it.”

“I can’t help it. I’m a goner now, anyway. Don’t you see the
difference?”

“No.”

“I’ve got to do something. I’ve got to do something I really want to do.
I’ve lost my self-respect.”

“You don’t have to do that.”

“Oh, darling, don’t be difficult. What do you think it’s meant to have
that damned Jew about, and Mike the way he’s acted?”

“Sure.”

“I can’t just stay tight all the time.”

“No.”

“Oh, darling, please stay by me. Please stay by me and see me through
this.”

“Sure.”

“I don’t say it’s right. It is right though for me. God knows, I’ve
never felt such a bitch.”

“What do you want me to do?”

“Come on,” Brett said. “Let’s go and find him.”

Together we walked down the gravel path in the park in the dark, under
the trees and then out from under the trees and past the gate into the
street that led into town.

Pedro Romero was in the café. He was at a table with other bull-fighters
and bull-fight critics. They were smoking cigars. When we came in they
looked up. Romero smiled and bowed. We sat down at a table half-way down
the room.

“Ask him to come over and have a drink.”

“Not yet. He’ll come over.”

“I can’t look at him.”

“He’s nice to look at,” I said.

“I’ve always done just what I wanted.”

“I know.”

“I do feel such a bitch.”

“Well,” I said.

“My God!” said Brett, “the things a woman goes through.”

“Yes?”

“Oh, I do feel such a bitch.”

I looked across at the table. Pedro Romero smiled. He said something to
the other people at his table, and stood up. He came over to our table.
I stood up and we shook hands.

“Won’t you have a drink?”

“You must have a drink with me,” he said. He seated himself, asking
Brett’s permission without saying anything. He had very nice manners.
But he kept on smoking his cigar. It went well with his face.

“You like cigars?” I asked.

“Oh, yes. I always smoke cigars.”

It was part of his system of authority. It made him seem older. I
noticed his skin. It was clear and smooth and very brown. There was a
triangular scar on his cheek-bone. I saw he was watching Brett. He felt
there was something between them. He must have felt it when Brett gave
him her hand. He was being very careful. I think he was sure, but he did
not want to make any mistake.

“You fight to-morrow?” I said.

“Yes,” he said. “Algabeno was hurt to-day in Madrid. Did you hear?”

“No,” I said. “Badly?”

He shook his head.

“Nothing. Here,” he showed his hand. Brett reached out and spread the
fingers apart.

“Oh!” he said in English, “you tell fortunes?”

“Sometimes. Do you mind?”

“No. I like it.” He spread his hand flat on the table. “Tell me I live
for always, and be a millionaire.”

He was still very polite, but he was surer of himself. “Look,” he said,
“do you see any bulls in my hand?”

He laughed. His hand was very fine and the wrist was small.

“There are thousands of bulls,” Brett said. She was not at all nervous
now. She looked lovely.

“Good,” Romero laughed. “At a thousand duros apiece,” he said to me in
Spanish. “Tell me some more.”

“It’s a good hand,” Brett said. “I think he’ll live a long time.”

“Say it to me. Not to your friend.”

“I said you’d live a long time.”

“I know it,” Romero said. “I’m never going to die.”

I tapped with my finger-tips on the table. Romero saw it. He shook his
head.

“No. Don’t do that. The bulls are my best friends.”

I translated to Brett.

“You kill your friends?” she asked.

“Always,” he said in English, and laughed. “So they don’t kill me.” He
looked at her across the table.

“You know English well.”
